Hey guys, welcome back to the course.
So, in this lecture, we're going to tackle the holy trinity of the cloud,
the SaaS, the PaaS, and the IaaS.
First off, let's talk about the word I just used,
to make sure that everyone is on the same page.
Talking about that word I just said, "cloud."
Now, I'm 100% sure you've heard the term "cloud" before,
as in "it's saved in the cloud," or "it's connected to the cloud."
When we say cloud, we don't mean an actual cloud, obviously,
and we don't also mean some big, amorphous blob of technology,
we're actually referring to something very specific.
Cloud just means stored and accessed
on a different device or server than the device I'm currently using.
Traditionally, this means stored at some central location
or locations operated by a service provider.
Now, let's say I saved a photo to the cloud.
That could mean a lot of different things.
It could mean that it's stored down the street,
it could also mean that it's stored on a server run by Dropbox,
or one run by Google, or one run by any service that I pay for,
but in all scenarios it always essentially means the same thing, which is "not here,"
and that's a good way of remembering it.
It's the opposite of the term we use sometimes, which is "local,"
local meaning your local hard drive on the computer you have,
so if it's not here, it's not on your local drive.
So why do we use the cloud?
Well, because internet speeds are getting faster,
and our devices are connected more often than before.
Mobile technology changed this considerably.
We're now connected in between leaving the office and on the way home,
and not just at those two locations, like it used to be.
Because of that, we're getting to an intersection in technology,
where people are asking the question, "Do we even need hard drives?"
If I'm always connected, and my internet speed is consistently getting faster,
then why don't I just store everything on a central server somewhere else
and save myself the trouble of hauling my files around with me all the time?
So, it's in that vein that I introduce these three concepts.
Cloud is not a new trend by any means, we've been in the cloud paradigm,
if you will, for at least five years, but these other concepts are quite new,
like the concept of PaaS and IaaS, PaaS and...
I've never heard someone pronounce that second one.
To get at these concepts, let's start with the easiest to understand,
and coincidentally, the most common type you see.
So the first one is Saas, which is S-A-A-S, and it stands for Software as a Service.
Now, what is the difference between a service and a product?
Because you heard software, you probably just thought it was a product.
Well, the relevant difference in this case is that
a product you own and keep yourself, and a service you don't.
Let's say I bought Adobe Photoshop, and I know that Adobe is changing this,
but for the first ten years of their existence, this is specifically how they worked.
Anyway, if I bought Photoshop, I would download that software on my computer,
and then access it on my computer whenever I wanted to.
I wouldn't have to connect to the internet to use it, and my computer
would store everything it needs to run that system within itself.
So, what I described is a product.
The trend nowadays though is to say,
"Hey, why mock up their hard drives, and why constantly have to deal with
getting people to update their software, when we, the company,
can actually just house it for them, maintain it for them,
and then just lease out the use of the software to them?"
That description I just gave you is what makes it a service,
because they own the means of production, to use a term from Karl Marx,
and you're paying for the pleasure of using it for an end result.
So how would Photoshop become a SaaS tool?
Well, one way would be to make a web version of their system.
In that scenario, you just recreate all the tools and functions
in a website that you pay to access and use.
Now, alternatively, and this is what they actually did, but it's much less common,
is make logging into the software only accessible through the web,
and have the software they downloaded constantly
check online to see if you've paid to use it,
if you haven't paid it shuts off and prevents you from using it.
Now, in nine out of ten cases, the option would be to go web only.
Now, a great example of this would be a tool
I use all the time, it's actually called Canva.
The activities in this course were made in Canva.
If you haven't used it, check it out.
They created a simplified version of Photoshop, and it exists entirely in the browser.
You pay per month, and then you get to access
all the tools and functions they've created.
You can even save your files and work on their
systems, and then access it any time you login.
The advantages of Saas are pretty obvious.
If you charge to borrow the use of a service,
you can charge less, but more often, and for longer.
If I buy Photoshop, I just pay once, and I'm done with it.
Now, to offset that, they might have to make the price really high to get
the same amount of revenue, and that ends up discouraging people from testing it out.
Another advantage is that you can access your files
and these tools anywhere you have an internet connection.
That means if you don't have the same computer, it's not really a big deal.
If you write a paper in Microsoft Word, and you
need to access it later from, say, your phone,
but it's on your computer hard drive, well, there's nothing you can really do,
but if you use Google Docs, you can access
it through your browser pretty much anywhere.
The last benefit we already mentioned is continuous updating.
No waiting for your users to finally update their system manually,
you could just make the changes yourself,
and when they login, voila, the changes have happened.
Ok, so that's Saas.
It's a new way of delivering software that relies on the world's increasing
connection to the internet to deliver a more valuable, accessible,
and profitable experience to both the user and the business.
Ok, so if that is Saas, then what is Paas?
PaaS, on the other hand, stands for Platform as a Service,
and of the three concepts, this is actually the youngest.
Now, platform is a vague and loose term, I will admit this,
and you're going to have to get used to this term being thrown around a lot,
and at times correctly, or at times in just a way that doesn't even make sense.
In this case, platform just means a set of tools, resources,
and software that come together to let you build software on top of it.
For example, when Facebook first started out, it was not a platform.
You could message people, you could post photos, you could lie
about your sister's baby photo and say that the baby is cute,
even though it looks kind of like an alien or a squished melon,
but it wasn't until - you can kind of guess this - that Facebook started letting you create -
- well, actually it was video games - Facebook started letting you create your own games
that could be accessed through Facebook, and at that point it became a platform.
Slack, I don't know if you guys have used that, but it's just a fancy chat room,
and was just a fancy chat room until they opened up their system whereby you could
create apps that ran inside of Slack, mostly bots, unfortunately.
At that point, after the bots came, that's when it became a platform.
So in this sense, PaaS is designed from the get go to assist you in building software.
Think of it like this - if you were going to build an application locally and not in the cloud,
you would need to pick a language, a system for running and interpreting that language,
an IDE potentially, a database system, a web server,
a system for managing frameworks and libraries, etc.
You'd need to pull together a bunch of tools and resources.
Now, PaaS, on the other hand, is the cloud equivalent of all of that.
Amazon Web Services, or often referred to just as AWS,
is a set of tools that can help you build applications.
Microsoft Azure is another example, and it's just a bundle of tools, such as
the .NET framework, Microsoft SQL, and a thing called Live Services,
you can use all those together to build applications, save yourself time from
having to assemble the odd hodge-podge of tools that you need.
In these scenarios, they take all the tools that you need to develop applications
and deliver them in one nice little package with a bow on it.
If you guys ever heard of Heroku, that's another popular example of a PaaS system.
So instead of building it the old way, you might login to Heroku
and build your application there, since everything is already set up
and served to you essentially on a silver dish.
And if you were wondering, yes, you can build SaaS on a PaaS,
in fact, that's actually what happens the most, so think of it like a stack.
You have SaaS on top, you have PaaS in the middle,
since the PaaS helps you build the SaaS,
and the SaaS operates technically within that platform,
and at the bottom is the last of our topic area, that is IaaS.
Now this acronym that I cannot pronounce to save my life,
I don't know if anybody knows how to pronounce it,
it stands for Infrastructure as a Service.
Infrastructure as in what holds up and contains whatever it is that you're building.
90% of the time what we're referring to when we say IaaS is web storage.
Now, Amazon Web Services, IaaS, is a set of tools for putting together an app,
and is considered a platform as a service, but within that set of tools,
they offer a storage service, which is called Amazon EC2.
That is infrastructure as a service.
That's the 90% of it, they give you virtual web servers to run your application on.
The other 10% we're leaving out are tools and maintenance
that make the offering of servers a little more robust.
Infrastructure as a service systems typically will offer things like
security and firewalling, they'll do routing and network services,
and they'll do things like maintenance and load balancing for free.
It's pretty cool actually, and that's what the EC in EC2 stands for,
it's Elastic Cloud, as in "I wonder how much storage space and server speed
I'll need for my site, I'm expecting 200 visitors a day, and oops, I just got 10,000."
In a normal scenario, your web server would crash, but with EC2,
it can actually pick up on that and temporarily
give you more resources so you don't go offline.
If you set up your own server, it would be kind of hard to figure that out.
Ok, wow, that was kind of a doozy. Let's recap this.
SaaS is Software as a Service, most often seen as a web version of a software
that you have to pay monthly to use, but it can be in all sorts of different configurations,
as we've learned with Adobe Creative Cloud -
Adobe Creative Cloud, which owns Adobe Photoshop.
Platform as a Service, or PaaS, is an online set of tools that will help you speed up
and facilitate the process of creating applications, and it often includes
Infrastructure as a Service, which is generally subscription services to web storage,
and other useful things like load balancing and security maintenance.
All right, wow, that was a long lecture, I apologize
for that in advance if you're watching this,
I suggest going outside and stretching, or doing
something else, I don't know, just take a break.
In the meantime, I'll see you in the next lecture!